Good morning, everyone.
Welcome to Session 510,
which is printing and Mac OS X.
Hopefully you caught the big news that
one of the things we're doing in Jaguar
is actually replacing a significant
part of the printing architecture.
A little bit of that was talked
about very briefly in the keynote,
and we went into great detail at
yesterday's Darwin printing session
where we really went into detail
on the Common Unix printing system,
which is going to be the
new sort of underpinnings of
Mac OS X's printing architecture.
What we wanted to do in today's
session is really look at framing
how this large architectural change
is going to impact developers.
In many ways, it's positive.
You're not going to have
to do much renovation of
your existing printing code,
if at all, or your driver code.
They should just work.
And you'll hear that reinforced several
times during today's presentation.
Additionally,
we want to expose you to the new
possibilities that are capable with CUPS,
and we'll end Mac OS X,
so we'll do that today.
But one thing I want to make clear is,
one of the reasons why we did this,
it's a pretty drastic change
in an operating system that's
a little over a year old.
And one of the reasons it was done
was because we got an incredible
amount of feedback on the printing
architecture last year after
the WWDC printing session.
And that feedback was clear that
developers wanted to get access to
the internals of the printing system.
We had applications able to print.
We had a defined driver architecture.
So for common printing tasks in Mac OS X,
it was basically a complete picture.
But what we were really surprised to find
is the number of developers who wanted
to add value into the printing system.
And we feel we've accomplished that by
moving to a completely open architecture.
So what I'd like to do is
welcome Rich Blanchard,
the engineering manager for printing,
on stage to take you
through the presentation.
Thank you.
Thank you, Travis.
I appreciate it.
I wanted to start today by thanking
all of you developers for I think
what Travis called feedback over the
last year and a half about printing.
Your feedback comes to us
in many different ways.
A lot of times it's radar.
Sometimes it's through DTS.
But all of that comes to us,
and we do read it all.
In fact, every month,
I go over all the bugs
we have open outstanding,
and I make sure they have
the right classification,
they're nailed in the right release.
And as I do that,
since I've been doing that for so long,
I come up with a system.
And part of that system is
as I skim through the bugs,
I have this big questions list.
And a bug can make it in the big
questions list by meeting two criteria.
One, that bug, in order to address it,
must require significant infrastructure
or architectural changes.
Two, all the big questions
have to be independent.
So I built up this list.
It's about 20 right now.
And I wanted to give you some
examples of those big questions.
I'm also going to thank you
because you're all so very polite
when you give us this feedback.
Although sometimes it's
phrased somewhat pointedly,
and I wanted to give you
an example of some of that.
For example,
OS 9 has USB printer sharing.
OS X, the most advanced operating
system in the world,
does not.
What are you guys doing?
So it's pretty pointed.
Two, Apple is marketing OS X as a
UNIX well integrated with a
professional user interface.
Except when you print.
If you go to the command
line and you try and print,
you can't print to the same printer
as you can print to from your
Cocoa and Carbon applications.
So again, fairly pointed feedback.
Some other feedback comes from
people who are trying to move
applications over to OS X.
We've had a lot of feedback
from accounting people.
They say, "Okay,
can you just point us to the place
where you log all the files you
print?" And my first answer is,
"Yeah, that's dev null." But we
actually don't log that stuff.
And so I don't have a good answer there.
So, you know,
you nod your head and you go, "Yeah,
you're right." And I put it
in that big questions pile.
And a lot of PostScript interpreters.
"Hey,
where do I put my PostScript interpreter
in the system so that it's part of
the printing path?" We actually have
some hand wave answers for this.
Well,
you kind of read this printer module
and maybe an IO module over here.
I don't know anybody who
succeeded in doing it,
and that's our fault.
We haven't really given
you a good answer.
So I look at this list of big questions,
and once I can lift my head back
up and not be too depressed,
I decide, okay,
we'll go back to the beginning.
What are the goals for our print system?
What do we really want out of it?
And one of the goals is we
want our printing APIs and our
printing system to survive.
Okay, that's kind of a low bar, I know,
but I think some of you with not
really even great memories can probably
remember a couple of Apple print
systems that maybe haven't survived.
You can even look at Java.
Java is on the second
generation of their print APIs.
So not all printing APIs do survive.
And when they don't survive,
when they fail, they take a bunch of
applications with them,
and it's incredibly painful.
So lowest bar, hey, we need to survive.
But, of course,
we want to do more than that, right?
We want to thrive.
We want to have an application -- or,
I'm sorry,
a print system that your applications can
get all the features they need in order
to make both of our customers happy.
Not both of our customers.
The customers that
both of us share happy.
Will the two customers
please raise your hands?
But we want to thrive.
We also want an architecture
that's -- clear enough that you can
write middleware pieces and figure
out where they fit in and how
you can expand our print system.
That's important.
And one that's attractive enough
so printer manufacturers will want
to write printer drivers for OS X.
So those are the goals.
So we have this big
list of big questions.
God, how are we going to solve that?
And we have these really basic goals.
And it became pretty clear that the only
way we were going to answer those big
questions and stay true to those goals
was by making very drastic changes.
Scary changes.
Okay?
Big changes.
And that's what the rest
of my talk is about today.
These big changes.
We're putting a new print
spooler in the system.
Really simple, clear statement.
Not really that scary.
Until you realize that's
the back half of printing.
So I'm telling you we're
replacing half of printing.
We're making dramatic changes
to the user interface.
I think the user interface is
the front quarter of printing.
So we're dramatically changing the front
quarter and replacing the back half,
but everything else.
But that everything else,
we like a lot of things.
The current print system,
there are things in there we like a lot
and there are things in there we're very,
very proud of.
And those things are not changing.
And so while this is a dramatic change,
it's important to hold on to that fact
that there's a lot there we really like.
And the pieces we really like the
most out of the current printing
system actually come from you.
They're your applications and
they're your printer modules
to sort your printer drivers.
So even though we're
making these changes,
compatibility is key.
We didn't want to break your
applications and your printer modules.
I know you guys love learning APIs,
but... So we're extending our APIs.
We're not replacing them.
Print dialog extensions,
your printer modules continue to work.
And to show you how much we
care about those existing APIs,
we've expended a lot of engineering
time working with a really great
technical publications team to correct,
clarify, and extend the existing
printing documentation.
And thanks to DTS, you can go to
developer.apple.com/printing.
It's easy to remember now.
And you'll see all these links
to all the new documentation.
And we have more coming.
So we're making big changes.
Your APIs will keep working.
Your applications will keep working.
And we've even invested
further in those APIs for you.
So I wanted to go into depth a little bit
more on exactly what those changes are.
So the new print spooler you
probably found out is the
Common UNIX Printing System,
CUPS, Easy Software Products,
is the creator.
So why CUPS?
Why a new print spooler?
Well, it gives us those big
answers that we needed.
Printer sharing comes with CUPS.
So once we put CUPS in the system,
as it is on the CDs that
you have now with Jaguar,
you can share between two
OS X machines printers.
This guy can print to this guy's printer.
We had a great wireless demo on Tuesday,
I believe.
Command line integration is
another one of the big answers.
With CUPS in the system,
you can go to the command line
and you can LPR to the exact same
printers you can see from your
Cocoa and Carbon applications.
They're equal, which is very nice.
Accounting is there.
You can actually go read a real
file instead of a device and get
the pages that have been printed,
who printed them, when, how long it took.
And RIP support.
We have a very,
very specific answer for where a
PostScript RIP sits in our system.
In fact, we remove a PostScript RIP in
order to deliver OS X.
So there's this hole that you don't
have to be that creative to figure out,
hey, maybe that's where the
PostScript RIP goes.
We had some other goals.
We wanted to be a better team player.
We understand that Macs are going
to be living in environments
that are not just Mac only.
So we wanted to work
better in educational labs,
better in corporations,
better in publishing houses,
and we wanted to be more transparent.
As much as I like
talking to you each year,
you need to get information
more than once a year.
And so we want to be transparent
so you can see what we're doing
throughout that year and not have
to wait until this incredible day.
So we support standards.
That's the number one way
we're going to fit in better.
CUPS supports out of the box
the Internet Printing Protocol,
IPP.
It's an open standard from the
printer working group of the IEEE.
It's an IETF standard as well.
So you can go there,
you can get that standard,
you can download it, and you go, "Okay,
this is what Apple's trying to
put on the wire when they're
communicating between their two
boxes." So when doing printer sharing,
we're trying to use IPP.
There's the standard.
Hey, look, they're not doing it.
You can nail us on it because there's
a well-defined documentation for it.
We continue to use
PostScript printer description files.
It's an Adobe standard for
describing printer capabilities.
It's a big part of CUPS.
It's used for PostScript printers
and non-PostScript printers in CUPS.
We use that again.
You can go to someplace outside of Apple,
read some documentation, go, "Okay,
that's what they're trying to do."
Well,
how are we going to be well understood?
How can we be transparent?
Well, CUPS is open source.
It's released under the
GNU General Public License.
You can get it from
Easy Software from CUPS.org.
our Darwin repository.
And the great thing about
the Darwin repository is
that's our repository.
As we make changes for Jaguar,
when we check in a change
as we work day to day,
it goes right into that repository.
You can see every day what we're
doing with our print spooler.
So there shouldn't be too many surprises.
Maybe you can even tell us, "Hey,
you know that stuff you
checked in yesterday?
You may want to check it
out." So that's important.
We're also widely used on Linux systems.
CUPS is widely used on Linux systems.
It's also buildable
and usable on Solaris,
AIX, FreeBSD, a lot of different UNIXs.
An important part there is you
can actually go to somebody
other than Apple and say,
"Hey, you know,
how does this CUPS thing work?"
Because there are people out there
who are experts who are not us.
And we're happy to answer the questions,
but if you post to a news group,
maybe we're not going to get to it.
Or maybe you need to hire a consultant.
They're out there.
There are people out there who understand
our print system that is not us.
So to help you understand
our print system,
I wanted to show you where we're
coming from and where we are today.
This is a slide we've been
showing substantially unchanged
for several years now.
This is the 10.1 printing system.
It was also the 10.0 printing system.
You can see your application
on the left side of it.
Print server's in the middle.
It's sort of where the bull's-eye is.
We're going to get to that.
It's going to be disappearing
here in a minute.
And then the print job manager,
which hosts your printer
modules and your IO modules.
So bang, print server's gone.
We have CUPS there in
the middle of the system,
back end of the system.
There's one other subtle change as we
went from that slide to this slide.
In the previous 10.1 system,
what you used to submit normally
was a PDF file to the print server.
And along with that came
an Apple job ticket.
That's different with CUPS now.
You get the PDF file and
you get a set of IPP,
Internet Printing Protocol attributes.
So there's a subtle change there.
Brand new print spooler.
So to break that down a little further,
this was Michael Sweet,
the author of CUPS,
went over this pretty well yesterday
in the Darwin printing session.
But when you print with the CUPS daemon,
CUPS server, it generates a print server.
And it's a printer that's going to print.
And it's going to print a print
chain of processes in order to print.
And that print chain is generally
talked about as a triplet.
There's a filter to do file conversions
from the file type that came in,
in our case, PDF,
to the file type you want to have go out.
There's a CUPS driver.
That's the last stage of the filtering.
It kind of gets the data
ready for the printer.
And then there's a back end,
which actually does the communication.
But of course we are also
supporting your printer module
so these pieces still stay.
PrintJobManager still exists
for those of you who have had to
write print modules and know how
that works in your I/O modules.
It's still housed by PrintJobManager.
So I wanted to give you a quick
walk through of what happens from
your application down to your
printer modules when you print.
We'll assume your application is Carbon.
And for this example,
we're going to assume that your printer
is a PostScript AppleTalk printer.
So your Carbon application probably
is going to draw with Quick Draw.
When it does, we convert that into
Quartz drawing commands,
and that gets spooled as PDF.
So even though you're drawing Quick Draw,
our spool files,
unless you do something special,
our spool files are all PDF,
which is important.
We take all the settings that
come out of the print dialog,
convert them into IPP attributes,
and then we take those two
pieces of information and
we hand them to the server.
Server, CUPS, looks at this and goes,
"Hey, wow, I've got PDF.
The printer you're
targeting is PostScript.
I've got to get from PDF to PostScript.
So what am I going to do?"
And it looks through the system,
and on OS X it finds a piece
of quartz technology that can
convert PDF to PostScript.
So it runs that and it
hands it the file and says,
"Hey, I need you to convert this to
PostScript." It starts running
and it writes to its standard
out a PostScript stream.
It's not a device-ready
PostScript stream,
but it's a PostScript stream
with all the drawing commands.
CUPS also said, "Hey, well,
I need somebody who can make it
device-ready." So attached to the
standard out of that converter,
I'm going to put another process that
knows how to take that PostScript stream
and make it device-ready,
insert the feature
code to ask for duplex,
copies, and all those sort of things.
And then the last step, "Hey,
I need to talk to an AppleTalk printer.
So I need some piece that
knows how to talk Pap." So I'm
going to run a third process.
It's reading his standard in,
which is the device-ready PostScript,
and is writing to the printer.
So this is the print chain.
That's how you get from your
Quick Draw all the way down to
PostScript going to a Pap printer.
So, you all caught those three slides?
This is the compatibility story.
The compatibility story when
you print will go from a
Cocoa application this time.
Now you're using NS drawing commands.
Again, that gets captured as Quartz
drawing commands and spooled as PDF.
The PDF goes to disk.
We take the print settings that
come out of the print dialer.
We turn them into IPP attributes.
We hand them to the print spooler.
Same story, a very similar story to
the Carbon Printing System.
But now CUPS is going
to look at it and go,
"Oh, well, now you want to talk to a
printer that's hosted by a
printer module that was written,
say, for 10.1 or 10.0." So what
does it have to do?
Well, it has to run a filter
just like it does before.
And we've made PrintJobManager
look like a filter for CUPS.
So the PDF file gets handed
to PrintJobManager and he
does what he's always done,
run the printer module, run a converter,
run an I/O module.
So that's why everything
continues to work for printer
The abilities of CUPS are
pretty incredible.
It does a lot of things.
And it's important that you
understand we're not going to
bring out all those things,
certainly not in Jaguar,
and my suspicion is not ever.
We're going to target our customers.
What is the feature set that makes
the most sense for our customers?
But it's important that you understand
what features we're not bringing
out now and may not ever bring out.
But CUPS has authentication,
it has encryption, it supports quotas,
it supports printer classes,
which are groups of printers
which look like one printer
to everybody else on the net.
And it has a web administration.
The first set of those things we're just
not going to support right now in Jaguar.
If you change CUPS underneath
us to enable those things,
our UI and everything still works.
So we're compatible with them,
but we're not going to put
in UI to enable any of this.
Web administration is a little different.
We're also not putting in UI to say,
"Okay, here's how you get to the web
administration," but it's there.
If you're on a system,
you can fire up Explorer,
you can connect to the IPP port,
and you can get a web page that
shows you all the printers,
their current status, and that is there.
It's great for remote administration,
that kind of thing.
So the best way to understand CUPS,
understand what's in there,
what we're using and
what we're not using is,
and I sold this too hard yesterday so I'm
going to sell it a little softly today.
You must buy this book
if you want to understand
Darwin printing or OS X printing.
That was a little softer than yesterday.
This is a great book.
It's written by Michael Sweet.
He's the architect of CUPS.
It explains the internet
printing protocol better than
anywhere else I've ever found.
Better than anywhere
else I've looked a lot.
You should watch the Darwin session.
Michael Sweet,
again the architect of CUPS,
gave the Darwin printing session
yesterday tons of information.
I told him his job was to overload
the people in the audience.
I think he did.
Just tons of information.
There's online documentation.
It's at CUPS.org.
It's also on your Jaguar CDs.
And read the code.
Again, we're open source.
And it's a hard thing to get your mind
around this whole open source concept.
The concept that you can see exactly
what we do every day with our spooler.
The concept that you can actually
go fix bugs and instead of
just giving us the bug report,
go here's the bug report
and here's the fix.
So we want you to get
your head around that.
It's taken me a while.
But some people just get it.
And I wanted to give a quick
example of somebody who got it.
This is Global Graphics.
They saw the announcement from
Easy Software back in March and said,
hey, Apple has licensed our stuff.
Now, Apple, we didn't want to announce
this until the WWDC,
so there's this hole
between March and now.
But these guys guessed that maybe we were
going to announce something sometime,
so they went and they downloaded CUPS.
And we had been working
with the CUPS folks,
so it built on OS X already.
So back in March,
you could build it on OS X.
So they downloaded it, built it.
Said, hey,
we've got these PostScript pieces.
We have pieces that convert PostScript to
PDF and PostScript to raster.
So maybe we can move that to OS X.
So they moved it to OS X.
And they said, well,
maybe we can plug it into CUPS.
And they plugged it into CUPS,
and all of a sudden,
they had a PostScript rip in
a CUPS system running on OS X.
There was no UI for it, right,
because they didn't have our pieces.
They did this completely independently.
But they completely understood
the open source thing,
got it, and built everything.
And, you know, OS X is built upon Unix.
So if you have some Unix software,
it's easy to port.
CUPS has great documentation,
and it's easy to understand.
And, you know, with those two messages,
maybe you might think it would take
them less than two days in order to
get a PostScript rip onto our system.
But two days is what it took them.
Fairly impressive.
And the result is you can actually
print to a raster printer a
PostScript file from Global Graphics.
So I wanted to really applaud
these guys because they got it,
and they did it quickly.
So how do you get it,
and how do you do it quickly?
So, if you go look in the code,
there is a configuration file,
cubsd.conf,
that has a lot of comments and all
the switches for the print spooler.
And you can go in there and read
it and immediately understand
all the different things you can
and cannot do with the spooler.
So it's a great place to start.
Filters,
you can go look at the documentation
for filters and figure out how to
plug in some technology you have.
It might not be a PostScript RIP.
It might be a Microsoft Word converter.
It might be some strange
graphics format converter.
Whatever you like,
it's an easy way to get
things into the print system.
CUPS has a lot of different logs.
If you want to present that
kind of information to the user,
there's accounting logs,
there's error logs, access logs.
The access log is kind of
interesting because it's
actually in common log format.
So if you have analog or
any of those other tools,
you can actually read it and generate
HTML reports right out the back door.
The last piece is GIMP print.
It's actually not in
the CUPS source code,
but it's a sister project, if you will.
It's a set of open
source printer drivers.
You go out there,
they split up 300 printers.
We've worked with them as well.
If you download that project,
it will build now on OS X,
and it will work with CUPS.
So it's a pretty good story.
And if you have drivers that
you're developing that you'd
like to be open source,
it's a great project to be involved in.
Places outside of the code to look at,
because I think there are a couple of
you who might want to go there instead.
CUPS.org PWG.org is the
printer working group.
This is the printer
working group of the IEEE.
This is where you'll find
the IPP specifications.
It's a pretty good site.
There's a lot of interesting
information there and you can see
some of the projects that are ongoing.
And of course the
GIMP print SourceForge site.
So for user interface,
we had to make some changes in
order to support all this new power
that was coming into the system.
And what do you do when
you get a lot of power?
Well, the initial reaction was
to do something like this,
which take essentially that
CUPS configuration file and
blast it all out to the user.
But we knew we didn't want to do that.
Please don't do this.
It's not fair to our users.
But it does give you some
idea of what CUPS can do.
But what did we do?
So we revamped Print Center.
In fact, we rewrote it.
We put in new printer browsers.
They're more asynchronous.
They behave better.
They look better.
And earlier in the year,
you probably saw, along with iPhoto,
we rolled out a new simple
print dialog for users,
consumer type users,
and the concept of printer presets
where a manufacturer device can wrap
all of his complicated settings.
If I'm printing a photo,
I want this paper,
and it should have this gamma setting,
and I should be enhancing this part.
You can wrap that all up into one
single element that the user can select.
So that was the idea behind presets.
So the PrintCenter rewrite
took place in Cocoa,
and I also want to take
a moment to applaud them.
So by rewriting it,
we were able to shrink the
code size by a factor of five,
the number of lines of source code,
which is pretty incredible,
especially when it's more powerful,
it does more, and we pick up a lot
of the Cocoa features.
For instance,
you can go in there and now customize,
as a user,
what you want to see in PrintCenter.
So big hand for Cocoa.
They were--it was a
terrific thing to work with.
And I wanted to show you quickly
what PrintCenter looks like,
and there are a couple
other demos that may work.
We'll see.
But give you an idea of what
can be customized and what our
goals were there in PrintCenter.
Here's Print Center.
It defaults to a look that's very similar
today with the exception of the toolbar.
But the idea was a lot of
our users are home users.
They have maybe one printer.
Unlikely they have more than that.
And they don't want to be bothered with
a lot of the different parts of it.
So what we show them is the name
of the printer and the status.
Simple, nothing going on.
But a lot of you, in particular,
might want more information.
So,
Just like you'd expect from
a good Cocoa application,
you can customize the toolbar.
You can add all sorts of stuff up there
and get the tools that you want close
This was probably one of the major
sources of feedback from you was,
"Hey, can you put this button right
at the front of PrintCenter?
I want to be able to configure
right from PrintCenter,
right from the start."
So with this configuration,
you can do it.
We also have a lot more information
available from PrintCenter.
Get some of this up here.
You can see who's hosting a computer
because we now have printer sharing.
We can tell you where it is.
We can tell you what type it is.
And if you look here,
there are a couple interesting elements.
We have a local printer.
This is Epson connected right here.
We have a printer that's right
next to it that's being shared
by the machine right here.
And we have another machine that's
over at this address 206.14.52.56.
That machine's about
100 miles north of here.
When I set up this PowerBook,
I actually went into the
CUPS configuration file.
We don't have UI for this.
But I told it, "Hey,
I want you not only to
look on your local subnet,
but I want you to go talk to this
Mac OS X machine that's sitting up here
in Sonoma and get all its printers."
And it happens to be sharing one printer.
So we have two local machines
and one that's a long way away.
That was the idea behind PrintCenter.
I'm going to leave PrintCenter
behind very quickly.
I want to talk a little bit about
the remote printing aspect of it.
Cubs, by default, will pull, as I said,
the local subnet.
And that's pretty powerful,
and that's what we're going
to bring out in Jaguar.
But there is this ability to go
out and talk to remote printers.
And I work with my brother, actually,
and he's the man who is sitting
at a desk right now with that
desk jet sitting next to him.
And, you know, I love my younger brother.
But every once in a while,
I need to send him a little
message to kind of keep him honest.
So this is the Epson C80,
which comes up selected.
If I go to the print dialog,
select the DeskJet 930,
there'll be a small delay here.
What's happening right now is we're
talking to that machine and we're saying,
"Hey,
can you tell me about yourself?" And,
of course, this delay in a real demo is a
little longer than you might like.
There you go.
How about that?
Okay.
So it's talking to the machine,
thank God, and it pulls down a PPD that
describes that machine.
And so what we can do once that
information comes back down,
we now cache it so we now have it,
is we can actually build
the real UI for this driver.
So even though this is a remote printer,
we can present the custom HP UI.
I think that's pretty impressive.
I like that.
I know I had to beg for it,
but I appreciate it.
So we'll just print that,
and that's now actually heading north,
and it'll wake my brother up,
and maybe he will get back to work.
So I've got one more demo for you here,
and this one needs a
little bit of background.
Printing is in the
graphics and imaging group.
That's the group that we work in,
the printing team.
And the other parts of the graphics
and imaging group are teams like
OpenGL and the Quartz Compositor,
the Quartz Xtreme group.
And you've probably seen
a lot of their demos.
It's kind of tough being in
that group because they have
great demos and printing,
we have to work a little harder.
So you kind of get a little small
inferiority complex working with them.
So what we did for the graphics and
imaging overview the other day is
we did this wireless printing demo.
So there was all this
great compositing demos,
and then we came along with
the wireless printing demo,
and I was pretty happy with that.
It sort of felt like we held our own.
But then later, there was the compositing
session where they had held
their really great demos for,
and now I really have
an inferiority complex.
So there is an old circus saying,
which is, if the other high wire
act has better tricks,
you need to raise the
wire and remove the net.
And that's what we're going to do.
I've got a demo for you that
nobody inside of Apple or
outside of Apple has seen.
I'm the only person who's ever seen this.
I've seen it work once.
Okay?
And we're going to try this.
do is open up this Epson here.
It's an Epson printer.
It's a Raster printer.
Start with that.
The idea at first was
essentially I wrote this during,
in between print sessions
the last couple days.
We've had this request a little bit,
which was, hey, you know,
why can't I drag, say,
a PDF file into a queue so it can print?
So this is the old desktop
printer type behavior.
So we can do that and that would
work and you can trust me and
people have actually seen that.
But that wasn't enough because of
all the great compositing demos.
So I took the Global Graphics
code that they had sent over our
way and what they had in there,
one piece they had,
could convert PostScript to PDF.
So I put that in underneath
CUPS and told CUPS about it.
So now CUPS knows, okay,
if I got a PDF file, a PostScript file,
I can get to PDF.
Well, Quartz has a piece already in there
that can go from PDF to raster,
and then the printer module for the
Epson can go the rest of the way.
So, conceptually,
if we drag a PostScript file
into this print queue,
it would accept the drop,
hand it to CUPS, CUPS would go, "Oh, wow,
PostScript." Okay, well,
I can get that to PDF and go, "Well,
I can use Quartz to go PDF to
Epson," and then it will hand it in,
and we will print.
So, not this one, it is that one.
The status is going to
be a little shaky here.
I'm not sure I got the status working.
Oh, man.
Okay, well, like I said,
I've seen this work once.
And what I'm going to do is
just dance here for a moment.
Hope the printing comes out.
So was that all very clear,
what's actually trying to have happen?
Hey, wait a minute.
How about that?
Okay, here we go.
So this is about a 20-page
PostScript document.
It's cranking out.
It's going very quickly
because it's a great printer.
And PostScript to Raster,
which we've never been
able to do on the system.
[Transcript missing]
So,
just wanted to give you a quick summary
so far before I hand off the microphone.
We're making big changes
in OS X printing.
It's very important.
It's the principle or
it's the user interface.
Please,
please do not leave this room without
the message that we are maintaining
compatibility for your applications,
for your printer modules,
and for your printer dialog extensions.
We are trying to make this as easy a
change for you as possible given the
extent of the changes we're making.
And so I tried to not really scare you,
but sort of give you a good grasp of
the number of changes that are coming.
Paul Danbold is now going to
come up here and calm you down,
show you the new APIs,
show you that they're very
similar to the old APIs and
that the old APIs still work.
So, Paul?
Thank you very much.
Okay, thanks Rich.
Good morning.
And if I can figure out how to change
the -- which button do I press?
Ah,
I have to turn it around the right way.
Okay.
Which button were you pressing?
There we go.
Got it.
Come on.
All right, as Rich said,
I'm going to talk about new APIs,
talk a little bit about new sample code,
new documentation.
Along the way,
a few guidelines and words of advice
for anybody in the business of
producing or consuming print jobs.
So we'll start with the new APIs.
These are all application APIs.
These are all things relevant for
Carbon application developers.
In particular,
some of the things we're talking
about here I think are going
to be useful for people who are
printing without a print dialog,
for people writing printer utilities.
And when we come to
talk about preset APIs,
it's for people who want to take
advantage of presets like iPhoto.
So we'll start with the no dialog APIs.
If I can get this gadget working.
Okay.
On 10.1 today,
we've got accessor functions for the
page format and print settings objects,
so you can set up a print job
and print it through a print loop
without using any print dialogs.
There's no way to suppress
our spooling dialog when we're
generating the spool file.
So it's obviously something
we were remiss in addressing.
So we've added four new APIs,
so-called no-dialog APIs.
You can use these instead of
the existing print loop APIs.
They take the same arguments.
Basically, if you call these,
you're just telling the printing system,
I don't want to see your progress
dialog while the job's being generated.
So I'd say use these if your application
doesn't use our print dialogs.
Also use these if, for example,
you want to use a print loop to support a
saver's PDF function in your application.
You could also use these if you
want to generate and display
your own progress dialog.
But I'd ask you not to do that unless
you've got a really good reason,
because we'd rather most applications,
when they're printing,
the user sees the same spooling dialog.
Looks like that printer's very busy, sir.
Okay, so those are very easy.
The next set of functions we
call the PM Printer functions.
In 10.1 today,
you can call a function called
PM Session Create Printer List.
It'll hand you back a
list of printer names.
That's the same set of names
that you see in Print Center and
in the print dialog when you're
looking at available printers.
And you can also call a function
called PM Session Get Current Printer,
which will hand you back
a PM Printer object.
From which you can find out, for example,
resolution settings for the printer,
and if it's a PostScript printer,
the URL to the PPD file.
But it's pretty limited,
so we're making the PM Printer function
a first-class citizen in Jaguar.
And there's a new way of
getting PM Printer objects,
and then there's a long
list of accessor functions.
PM Server Create Printer List.
You should use this instead of
PM Session Create Printer List,
not just because you don't have
to create a session to call it,
but because it'll hand you back
in a row of different ways.
PM Printer List.
You should use this instead
of PM Printer objects,
and once you've got those objects,
you can then hand them to a
bunch of new APIs to get some
hopefully useful information.
PM Printer List.
You should use this instead
of PM Printer objects,
and once you've got those objects,
you can then hand them to a
bunch of new APIs to get some
hopefully useful information.
The Get Name function just hands
you back the name of the printer
that you'd see in Print Center.
Get ID will hand you back
the unique internal name we
use for every printer queue.
Something that you may have seen
if you've been running Jaguar.
The new Print Center allows you
to enter a text string describing
the location of a printer.
This is very useful if you're sharing a
printer and you want to tell everybody
that's in the hallway or in your office,
whatever.
So the Get Location API will return
to you the string that the user typed
in when he or she created the queue.
Most of the other functions are, I think,
helpfully named,
so it's pretty obvious what they do.
There's a few more here.
A couple of words about the second one.
PM Printer is PostScript capable.
I guess the use of it is obvious.
You should use this instead of the old
API called PM Is PostScript Driver.
Use this to find out if the target
printer is PostScript capable.
And for example,
if you had an application that had a
print dialog extension that had some
features for non-PostScript printers and
a different set for PostScript printers,
you'd call this function.
And then change your UI accordingly.
Get State.
That function will tell you
whether the PM printer that
you're passing into the function,
whether its associated printer is idle
or busy or maybe the queue stopped.
So there's a few more.
So basically,
this is a useful set of functions.
I think some applications
make care to use them.
Certainly if you're
writing a printer utility,
you'll probably find these useful.
Preset Functions So, as Rich mentioned,
when iPhoto came out, we introduced the
simplified print dialog.
We also introduced
this notion of presets.
Presets are basically just collections
of printer module settings,
and by picking a preset,
it's basically a one-click shortcut
to going into the print dialog panels
and picking paper type and print
quality mode and things like that.
So, very useful,
especially for iPhoto users.
And our thinking is that
other applications will want
to take advantage of presets.
So, we're adding a few APIs to do that.
And the one at the top here is probably
the one that most of you want to call,
the Enable Printer Presets API.
Just call that before you
bring up the print dialog,
and then the presets pop-up
menu will be populated with the
presets for the current printer,
assuming the printer driver has presets,
and hopefully most will.
So, totally straightforward to offer
presets in your print dialog.
Now,
that's not exactly the same as having
a print dialog where the applications
dialog shows some application
controls and just the presets pop-up,
and then there's an advanced settings,
advanced options button that allows
you to toggle between the simplified
dialog and one that displays
all the print dialog panels.
We're working on some
sample code for that,
and we'll post that as soon as we can.
If you need to delve deeper into presets,
and maybe printer utilities
may want to do this,
there's some more functions.
Copy presets will simply hand
you back the presets associated
with the PM printer that
you pass into the function.
Having got those presets,
you can call the Get Attributes API.
That will hand you back the detailed
information about what's in the preset,
which is basically an ID, a name,
and a dictionary containing all
the printer module settings.
Copy Name will hand you back the
localized name of the preset.
And then,
once you pick the one you want to use,
maybe you don't have a print
dialog and you want to do this,
call the Create Print Settings function,
and it'll create print settings
embodying the preset options.
So, this is particularly useful,
for example, if you want to generate,
say,
a test print on a particular paper type,
a particular quality mode,
you don't want to use a print dialog,
but you want to do this
within your application.
So, call these functions,
and you'd have some
control over the printers,
over features like paper
type and print quality.
Okay, so those are the new APIs.
There's a few more going into Jaguar.
You'll see them,
some of them in the seed that you
got this week and a few more that
I may mention later in future seeds.
We'll talk about some new sample code.
Some of this isn't so new,
but it certainly appeared
since we were here last year.
The first three, App Using Sheets,
Carbon Quartz Drawing,
and the Draw Picture,
are already available on
DTS's sample code site.
You can get them on the Toolbox CD.
They're all Carbon apps,
and we'll be talking a little
bit about what they do.
PDE Print is not available yet.
It's some sample code that will accompany
the print dialog extension documentation
that's going to be published,
the final version published,
in a few weeks from now.
App Using Sheets simply tells
you how to support document modal
printing and bring your print and
page setup dialogs down to Sheets.
It's so easy.
It's just one function,
PM session use Sheets,
and a couple of callbacks.
Carbon Quartz Drawing shows you how
easy it is to mix Quick Draw and
Quartz 2D graphics on the same
screen and in your print job.
Also how to generate a
PDF file from that content.
Very useful piece of sample code.
And if you go to the
graphics sample code page,
you'll find CG Draw Picture,
which is a little different.
That shows you how to render
a Quick Draw pic inside
a Core Graphics context.
Those two projects basically show you
how to move from maybe the old world that
you were working with on Mac OS X and
9 when you were supplementing what
you couldn't do in Quick Draw with
your own Post-Crit drawing on X.
The better way to do that
is to start using Quartz 2D.
And as I mentioned, PDE Print,
that's the sample code to show you
how easy it is to add print dialog
extensions to the print panel.
So about a week ago,
instead of showing you the
code inside these projects,
we just put together a simple test app,
which I'll show you.
"So we can switch over
to the demo machine.
I'm sure you can read that.
It's big enough.
So we've just got a sample project here.
Two components, an application and a
print dialog extension.
And I'm just going to point out
a few snippets of code out of it,
and then we'll put the
application through its paces.
So the first thing is that
the application supports
document modal printing,
brings down the dialogs as sheets,
and here's the function.
It's just called,
and a few lines below in the code,
you'll see the call to PM session,
print dialog, and hey, presto,
your dialog's going to
come down as a sheet.
Elsewhere in the project,
there's a similar call to bring down
the page setup dialog as a sheet.
Let's see.
I've got to get my crib Notes out,
so I go to the right.
Okay, the next thing to point out is
this test app supports spooling
multiple jobs in parallel.
So it's multi-threaded.
And the code we got to do that came from,
as you can see from the comment there,
the Carbon Event code
listing in inside Mac.
So it's cooperatively multi-threaded.
This enables us to spool a
print job from one window,
one document, in parallel with spooling
a print job from another.
And we'll see that in a moment.
Let's see what else.
The other thing our test app
does is it mixes QuickDraw and
Quartz2D when it's printing.
The example we've got here
will print a watermark using
Quartz2D on top of a document whose
contents are drawn with QuickDraw.
And if we look up here,
This is our function
that draws our pages.
It starts off by doing
some quick draw stuff.
Comes down this function.
We'll draw some text on screen
using text font and draw string,
etc.
And then when the time comes
we want to draw the watermark,
we call, because we're going to
use called graphics,
we call beginCGContext.
We need to translate between
the Quick Draw and the
Core Graphics coordinate spaces.
So this QDY to CGY is the macro
that just flips the Y axis.
And then inside this code,
which I won't show you for time reasons,
it starts off,
it changes the Core Graphics
CTMs so that we can draw a
text at an angle on the page.
And then it makes a few @ZUI
calls to draw the watermark text,
50% opacity on the page.
And then, when we're done with
drawing in Quartz 2D,
we call the end context function.
I guess the thing to point out
here is you don't see any code to
save and restore the graphic state.
You don't need to because the begin and
end functions take care of that for you.
So the G state's preserved as you switch
between Quick Draw and Core Graphics.
What else do we have?
The other thing here,
just a simple line of code.
You can see below it,
we bring up the print dialog.
The PM session enable printer presets
just tells the printing system
that you want to see the presets
when you bring up the print dialog.
That's just one line of code.
Here's a function that registers the
application's print dialog extension.
Pretty simple.
It goes and finds its bundle,
assumes the plug-ins inside the bundle,
and...
[Transcript missing]
Let's move over for a moment to
the Print Dialog Extension code.
The thing to point out here
is that it's Nib-based.
In other words,
we use Interface Builder to lay out the
controls in our Print Dialog Extension.
A whole lot easier than writing
a lot of Control Manager code.
The Nib-based code is a very
straightforward and easy to use.
You can see a call up
here to find the Nib file.
Then we call createWindow from Nib
in the initialization function to
build the UI for the Print Panel.
Last of all,
this function here will put whatever
the user selected in the print dialog
into the print settings ticket.
So if the user has picked
a watermark feature,
that setting will go into the
print settings ticket and then
back in the application code.
If I can find it.
Okay.
So here in the application code,
we're going to pull that setting
out of the print settings ticket,
and that will tell the application
how to draw its pages at print time.
In other words,
whether to image the watermark.
So that's just a quick look at the code.
Let's see if this thing runs.
Very simple app.
It's got one window here.
We can create multiple windows.
If we go to the print dialog,
we'll see it pops down as a sheet.
That's good.
If we go to presets,
we'll see this particular printer,
this S900's presets.
If we pull down the PD panel,
we can get to our application's PD,
which is pretty simple.
It just offers the choice
of printing watermarks.
We've got tooltips built in here,
which is nice.
One thing I didn't show you in the
code is if we click on the help button,
the PD actually has an event
handler to catch the help command.
It's registered its own help book,
so now we've got information via help
view on telling the user what the
What those PDE functions did.
So, that's useful.
So, it's pretty straightforward.
What I'm going to do is just print a
couple of pages here to the printer.
For demo purposes,
I'm going to come back and I'm going
to print a few pages to preview.
So we'll pick Watermark Under and
print all of the 500 pages.
[Transcript missing]
Let me just see if I can stop this job.
I guess this is where I tell you a joke,
but I can't think of one right now.
My printer seems to be taking
control of the system here.
Hopefully,
when we've printed those three pages,
I can use the system again.
Maybe not.
I'm going to give up in one second.
I don't seem to be
able to kill it either.
Well, I'm going to move along right now.
Had that demo worked,
I would have shown you two print
jobs falling in parallel and
showing you the results in preview.
We can switch back to the slides quickly.
Come up, Seija, later.
I'll show you it working.
All right.
So, just going to run through a few,
I think, well-known reminders for
all application developers.
Basically,
just telling you what we want you to do.
when you're writing your printing code.
The first one is a repeat
from what I said last year,
and probably the year before.
Use the so-called session APIs.
Early adopters of Carbon printing may
have started using the non-session ones.
We really need you to
use the session ones.
For the reason that the
non-session ones are deprecated,
we don't cover them anymore in
our documentation or sample code.
Any new functionality
that we bring up will,
where appropriate,
always be session-based.
And go to our print loop sample code,
which has been posted
for a long time now.
And you'll see basically how
to bring up the print dialogs,
how to execute a print loop.
The other thing I really want
to push fairly hard on now is
support document modal printing
and look at the sample code,
bring up all your page setup
and print dialogs as sheets.
Very easy to do.
If you're a Carbon application,
the sample code that we just showed
you is where you want to start.
If you're a Cocoa developer,
you ought to make sure that
you use the begin sheet with
print info method in your NSPage
layout and NSPrintPanel objects.
All Carbon, all Cocoa applications should
bring down their dialogs as sheets.
The other thing that I sort of
demoed for you is how easy it is
to write print dialog extensions.
And if you came from the
Mac OS 9 or older world,
probably familiar with using the
so-called append-dittle mechanism
to add controls to the print dialog.
Well, using print dialog extensions
is a whole lot better,
more powerful,
you have more control over the UI.
Coding it is pretty straightforward.
And we encourage you to look out
for the final print dialog extension
documentation and the sample code
when it comes out in a few weeks.
This next topic really deserves a
lot more time than we have today,
but basically we want everybody
moving from the old world,
the legacy way of printing with
mixing Quick Draw with PostScript,
to the new world,
which is to use the PDF print path and
to take advantage of the Quartz 2D.
So just to let you know, the old way,
the so-called Laser Iterate
Compatibility path,
is still in the printing system.
It's in 10.1.
It'll be in Jaguar.
The Get and Set Document Format
Generation APIs are shown in
the PrintLoop sample code,
show you how to tell the printing
system that you want to generate
a PICT with PostScript spool
file instead of a PDF path.
So that works and will continue to work,
but there are much
better things you can do.
And the sample code that
we mentioned a moment ago,
using calls like QD Begin CG Contacts,
QD End CG Contacts,
mixing Quartz 2D with Quick Draw,
that's really what you should be using.
So that's something we should be
looking at now and taking advantage of.
So that, as you've seen,
shows you how to mix Quick Draw and
Quartz on screen and when you print.
I think it's very possible
that a lot of you may be using
the Pick With PostScript path
because your application
wants to support EPS graphics.
When somebody drops an
EPS graphic onto your document,
you want to print it right
to a PostScript printer.
And so you felt that you had to
use the Pick With PostScript path
for that purpose.
Well, in Jaguar, new in the header,
not today, but in a future seed,
there's this PMCG image create
with EPS data provider function.
I'd like to see a
George Bush say that one.
And that basically just tells the
printing system you want to embed
EPS graphics in the PDF spool file.
You get both the postscript
representation of the graphic.
You also get the preview image.
So it will print correctly to both
postscript and non-postscript printers.
So look out for that in a
future version of Jaguar.
Okay, so that's enough for the
application checklist.
Now to talk a few minutes about
driver things that we want people
to do if you're in the business
of writing a printer module.
The first thing, as mentioned earlier,
is iPhoto uses presets.
We want or expect other applications
to be interested in using presets.
And so, obviously,
users will like all their printer
modules to support presets.
The documentation on presets,
explaining the internals of
presets and how to create them,
was posted shortly
after iPhoto went live.
And very straightforward.
I'm sure DTS is standing by to
help you if you have any questions.
But add presets to your
printer module bundles,
and then all the applications iPhoto
and other applications calling the
Enable Presets API will be able to take
advantage of your printer's presets.
Printing and color,
again another topic that
could take a whole session.
Just limit this to a couple of comments.
One is
Well known that Mac users have
the highest expectations for
things like print quality,
fidelity, color matching when they print.
So they expect every printer
driver to come with a great set
of ColorSync profiles when they're
taking advantage of ColorSync.
So our message to you is really try
your best to produce great ColorSync
profiles that support all the
media types your printers support,
all the print quality modes you support.
And again, we're very open to talking to
you and helping you achieve that.
And then the other thing, of course,
you need to do when you've
created these profiles is make
sure you register them all.
Registering them is very straightforward.
You just provide a list of them when
you're creating the printer info ticket,
which is something that happens
when the queue is created.
We register your profiles
actually on your behalf.
And the thing to check is that
when you run the ColorSync utility,
that if you go to the printer section,
you can see all your profiles.
That means that an advanced user may
be able to override your profiles.
Richard Blaencarad,
Paul Danbold And so that's one of
the things that we're trying to do.
We're trying to make sure that we're
getting the right printer profiles
with one that he or she's generated.
It also means that high-end
applications like Photoshop can see
what printer profiles are available.
And it's also useful for
color-proofing applications.
So a lot of good stuff to be
done if you support ColorSync.
Richard Blaencarad, Paul Danbold
Another one on the list,
in the 10.1 version of PrintCenter,
if you pulled down the printers menu,
there was a configure printer item,
which was occasionally enabled
when PrintCenter knew the
location of the printer's utility.
In the new version of PrintCenter,
which Rich showed you a few minutes ago,
we've actually made it even more
obvious to the user how to get to
the utility in both the printer
list and the printer queue windows.
There's a big button that when
Jaguar ships will be a lot prettier.
It will provide the user with
a simple way of getting from
PrintCenter to launching your utility
and doing whatever your utility does,
like align heads and print test pages,
etc.
It's very simple to tell PrintCenter
where your utility is located.
You just put a key in
your Info.plist file,
PM utility URL,
and the value of that key is the path
to wherever you installed your utility.
Having mentioned install your utility,
I want to tell you that we really
don't want utilities and other printer
software scattered over the hard disk.
We'd much prefer you to install all
your printer components in library,
printers, and the directory you create
there for your printer modules
and associated software.
If you feel obliged to put links
to your printer utility elsewhere,
then yes,
it's okay to put an alias inside
the utilities directory that
will link to the real utility
that's inside library printers.
Another thing relative to
installers is to make sure you
know about the Make Queues tool.
Make Queues does a lot of what
Print Center does without a UI.
When you boot your Mac or
when you hot plug a printer,
Make Queues executes some code which will
automatically create a USB printer queue.
Your installer can also use Make Queues
to refresh the USB printer queue.
Execute Make Queues with the -r
switch and we'll go through and
recreate all the USB printer queues.
Another thing, you know,
our direction is to make setting
up queues as painless and as free
from user action as possible.
And I'm sure everybody knows
that we can automatically create
queues for USB printers without
the user going into PrintCenter.
And we want to continue in that direction
and make it as simple as possible
to create queues for the novice user
without having to know anything about
how the printer's connected or even,
you know, the name of the printer module.
Nothing like that should get in the
way of the user being able to print.
So, we are publishing all the source code
for our various printing I/O modules.
The USB and the LPR source code
is available on request from DTS.
But I want to make sure you understand
the reason why we make that source
code available is so that you can point
out bugs or deficiencies in our code,
not so that you can create custom
versions of our USB modules,
our LPR modules, etc.
So,
treat that source code as an opportunity
to tell us what enhancements need
to be made to support your devices.
And last and definitely not least,
you're obviously very interested
in all the CUPS stuff.
The message for today is,
if you're working on printer
module projects for new printers,
continue to do that.
Don't abandon anything
you're working on already.
As Jaguar gets ready to ship,
then come talk to us and certainly
by the time Jaguar is released,
we will have a lot more detailed
information to tell you about
the pros and cons of CUPS-style
drivers and backends versus the
existing printer modules and IOMs.
A few seconds to talk
about USB and printing.
There's quite a lot of details here
and I'll skip them and tell you to
come and talk to us later about this.
We are introducing a printing
class driver in Jaguar.
It will enable you to better support,
for example, multifunction devices,
printers that can scan, copy,
and sometimes fax as well as print.
Maybe your printer has some special, say,
non-compliant USB characteristics.
The printing class driver will make
support for your device a lot easier.
And although it's not in the
seed that was released this week,
hopefully the next seed of Jaguar
will have the printing class
driver code and readme file.
We encourage you to take a look at
it if you are a printer vendor or
driver developer and give us feedback.
We want to make sure this works.
This is a useful piece of
code to enable support,
for example, multifunction devices.
multifunction devices when Jaguar ships.
Another thing you may be interested
to know is that our USB code now
supports more device ID keys.
We use device ID keys to match the
physical printer we find on the bus with
a printer module that's on the hard disk.
So, Jaguar will be supporting
the compatibility ID.
We also support the serial number
ID as well as the product ID.
And where needed,
the hub's location ID so that we can,
for example, support multiple printers
of the same type,
identical printers on the bus.
And last on this list,
there are devices out there that
present multiple USB interfaces,
maybe unidirectional, bidirectional,
and some perhaps proprietary interface.
We've added an attribute now so
that the printer module can tell
the I/O module which USB interface
to use in talking to the printer.
Last but definitely not
least in these slides,
a few words about the new documentation.
And, as Rich said, the tech pubs group at
Apple did a great job this year.
We got a lot more documentation
than we ever had a year ago.
Three of the items on this in
the next slide are actually
available in book form.
None of these include
the CUPS information.
So, we'll keep tech pubs busy,
and we'll obviously have to
update some of these books,
but... Actually, I mentioned books.
Some of these are available in book form.
All of them are available downloaded
from the tech pub's website,
and they're also on the
reference library CD.
So, about the Mac OS X printing system,
basically just introduces you to
the architecture and the user model.
Cocoa printing documentation has
been updated since last year.
The PostScript printer description
file documentation tells you
how we find PPDs on the disk
and how we bind them to printer
queues and how we expose PPD-based
features in the print dialogues.
The Extending Print Dialog Documentation
just has one more engineering
review and then we'll post it.
It'll be the definitive document on
how to create print dialog extensions
for your applications or print modules.
Supporting printing in your
Carbon application is another
of the books that you can order.
It tells you how the print dialogs work,
how the page format and print
settings objects can be used,
about page recs and paper recs,
things like that.
It's a good read.
The big book of printing,
it's not that big, but I got a copy here,
is a Carbon Printing Manager reference.
I think it's 180 pages.
So it tells you all about the little
over 100 Carbon Printing Manager APIs,
all their associated data
structures and constants.
Rich was plugging in the CUPS book.
When you finish reading the CUPS book,
buy this, put it by your bedside.
It's great late night reading.
And last, definitely not least,
is the iPhoto documentation.
If your printer vendor tells
you about the internals of
presets and how to create them,
and again,
we're hoping that you add those
to your printer module bundles.
We also have some new detailed
API reference documentation.
The plugin interfaces,
that you'll probably want to read when
you're writing your printer module,
your print dialog extensions.
And there's new documentation
explaining how all our job
ticket and template APIs work.
I'll mention a new tech note as well.
It's not really a 10 thing,
but we've got a new tech note,
I think it's 2049,
tells you how you should create
what we call a PDAT resource for
your Mac OS 9 or 8 print driver.
We rely upon these PDAT resources
to tell the Carbon printing manager,
when it's running in
Carbon on Mac OS 8 and 9,
how to find various settings
in your print record.
The settings like page orientation
and copies and color mode,
etc.
It's very important for
Carbon applications running on
8 and 9 to work with drivers
that have these PDAT resources.
Apple provided a few in
the Carbon lib resource,
but we're no longer doing that.
Now we're looking to developers
of print drivers to do that.
So, tech note 2049 is sort of a must read
for Mac OS 8 and 9 driver developers.
That's it from me.
I've got a summary slide just to show you
or remind you what we've covered today.
Rich took you through the big changes,
the cup stuff,
all the functionality that enables.
Cocoa Print Center and changes to the UI.
I think you'll find that when
you're running Jaguar at home,
you'll see a lot of stuff that
we haven't been able to demo
today and it's all pretty good.
We just talked about some of the new
APIs going into Jaguar for applications.
We looked at some sample
code and new documentation.
Rich had some, some
[Transcript missing]
Before I take you through the roadmap,
I just want to offer some
comments on today's session.
We're really excited about the
opportunity that the new printing
architecture offers developers
because what we've done is
essentially put a new architecture
which is incredibly extensible,
incredibly flexible,
it's very approachable
because it's open source,
and so that's really
going to empower the,
you know, the new printing architecture.
Software developers want to get at
the middle of the printing system.
But there's also another great story that
you really don't have to change anything
if you're an application developer,
if you're a print driver manufacturer.
So all in all, it's a really great story.
And the possibilities are endless.
Like, for example,
we saw the technology demonstration with
global graphics post-script interpreter
being used in line with our print system.
And it was essentially
a little bit of coding,
drop it in, and it just works.
So it's an exciting opportunity,
particularly if you're a
core technology vendor,
because you can approach the platform
in a very defined direction that
enables you to just plug yourself in.
So we're really proud of that.
So what I want to do now is
quickly go over the roadmap.
And what I'll do is skip ahead,
because we want to get a
time for a good Q&A session.
And we will start with the sessions
that are left today in WWDC.
Obviously, we're at 5.10,
which is printing in Mac OS X.
Sessions that are left are 5.13,
OpenGL Advanced 3D.
Obviously, OpenGL is a big threat
at this year's WWDC.
It doesn't necessarily
relate to printing,
but a lot of things we're
doing with Quartz Extreme are
based on top of OpenGL.
And if you want to find
out more about OpenGL,
go to 5.13.
Also, same for OpenGL performance
and optimization.
That's a good session to learn a lot
of the fast paths that exist now in
the OpenGL implementation of Mac OS X.
Another sort of companion technology
that we have in graphics and
imaging is image capture framework.
And that's often going to provide
the input data that what the
user is later going to print.
And so we have a session on it.
We're going to be doing
that on image capture.
And one of the nice announcements
that we've made relative to image
capture is we've expanded it from
just supporting digital cameras
to supporting scanners as well.
So that's going to be on Friday.
Lastly,
one of the remaining sessions is 5.16,
Graphics and Imaging Performance Tuning.
You know, over the past year,
a big source of information that's
been required for developers,
or at least asked by developers,
is how do I make my application
go faster under Mac OS X?
Because the graphics
implementation is different.
The visual pipeline's different.
And that's where we're gonna
cover a lot of those details.
So a lot of your questions,
if you have performance
issues on Mac OS X,
are gonna be answered there.
And then, finally,
I wanted to make it clear
that the feedback forum,
which is Friday afternoon,
also includes printing.
So if you have any comments
to make on any of the things
we've talked about today,
or concerns or questions,
you can bring those
to the feedback forum,
and there'll be the engineering
managers for each area of graphics
and imaging will be there,
and we'll be able to
respond to those questions.
So now what I'd like to do-- well,
before I do that,
let me actually just give
you my contact information.
If you need to contact me relative to
anything we've discussed in this session,
this is my email address.
I handle printing as well.
You've seen me in a lot of
other contexts at this WWDC,
but, like I said, CUPS, how it's gonna be
integrated into Mac OS X,
other developer-related questions
relating to graphics and imaging,
please feel free to send me an email.